your local AI experience might look like
this a model that's using almost all
your system resources is almost burning
your PC and in the end isn't even that
quick well my local AI experience looks
like this I run AI models almost five
times as fast because I use quantized
models let me explain how that works and
how you can achieve the same when you
browse hugging phas to find your new AI
models to run locally you might make the
mistake of trying to use the models as
they were provided by the original
Creator as is for example let's say that
you want to use mistol if I look for
mistol 7B I can find a lot of different
models officially published by mistal Ai
and so you might think hey this is the
exact model that I want to use because
it's the official one and to be fair if
your machine can handle this then that's
totally fine but mistro 7B is already a
very large model and if you have a
weaker GPU you are not going to be able
to run this so what do you do then well
actually what you should do is scroll
down and look at the different
fine-tuned models that are created based
on the base model specifically you want
to look at models under the category
quantizations I'll explain later what
quantized models actually are but to
illustrate this if we click on the
models list here we can actually see
that there's a lot of quantized models
and we can for example explore this one
which is using 4bit quantization you can
see here that this model is promising to
use 70% less memory while being two to
five times faster and it's true what I
showed you at the beginning is not
clickbait if you actually use quantise
models they will use much fewer
resources while being way faster here I
opened LM studio and you can see here
that I have the full 7 billion parameter
mistal model which is almost 30 GB in
size and here I have the Q4 version of
the model which is quantized and this
one is only just over 4 GB in size then
this is extremely important because not
many consumer gpus can actually fit a 29
gab model into the memory of the GPU so
it's almost essential that you find
these quantise models when you're
running local Ai and again even if you
can fit the full model these smaller
models are also much faster so really
finding them is always a
winwin so how does this actually work
because there's no such thing as free
performance right well modern AI models
store billions of parameters as 32-bit
floating Point numbers basically decimal
numbers each parameter is like a small
container that can hold numbers with
extreme Precision think of numbers with
up to seven decimal
places now when you have a model like
Mel 7B There's 7 billion parameters and
so you can imagine that this will end up
taking a lot of space and you need to
load this entire model into memory in
order to run it so actually the full
mistol 7B model cannot fit on most
consumer Hardware because consumer great
CH use usually don't have over 20 GB of
f RAM available to them so what do we do
here well quantization actually offers a
solution because quantization asks do we
really need all of that Precision you
can imagine that in this full 32bit
version of the model we can have a
weight that storess
1.92 635 7 9 etc etc very precise number
but what if we were to just round that
number up to a two well we can indeed
change the numbers and cut off decimals
or indeed just round them up to the
nearest full number depending on how
much we want to quantize the model so we
can for example quantize it to 16 bits
which will cut the size in half eight
bits to cut the size to a quarter or all
the way down to four bits which cuts it
to just 1/8 of the original model size
and that shrinks a model like M 7B down
from 27 GB to Just 4 GB and suddenly it
becomes runnable on almost every modern
GPU which is great because it means that
consumers can run these models locally
now reducing from 32 bit numbers to 4
bit number Precision does mean that you
have a trade-off because you do have
lower Precision after all you're taking
out detail that was originally in the
model it's kind kind of like converting
a high resolution photo to a lower
resolution we lose some details but to
be fair the overall picture remains
recognizable and research shows that
when you're simplifying these models the
accuracy loss is actually not that bad
the model might perform one to 2% worse
but that's definitely worth the tradeoff
considering you can actually run much
stronger models on your own Hardware so
quantization has really transformed AI
from an exclusive technology that only
works in data centers to something that
anyone can use if you want to learn more
real AI engineering check out the link
in the description below and you can
join my AI engineering community where
you can learn how to build real AI
systems from beginning all the way to
end I'll see you there